---
layout: post
title: "06: Libraries"
menutitle: "06: Libraries"
date: 2019-10-15 22:32 +0000
tags: Python Tutorial Learning
category: Python Tutorial
author: am
published: true
redirect_from: "/2019-10-23-06-Libraries/"
language: EN
comments: true
---


learning outcomes
 - Awareness of numpy, pandas and matplotlib
 - Basic use of library functions
 - Self help for library function use
 - Familiarity with `ipython`

# `numpy`, `pandas` & `matplotlib`

`numpy` is the main math library in `python` and `pandas` (paid for by 2$\sigma$) is probabaly the most important data manipulation library. `matplotlib` is the most popular core plotting engine used by `python` developers.

Pandas is nothing more than a convinience tool based in numpy. This is crucially important to understand how they work together

First lets look at simply importing them and calling basic functions


```python
%matplotlib inline
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

Note the different ways in which the libraries are called. All good `python` libraries provide a quick-start guide


```python
np = 10
print(np)
```

    10


This is a terrible idea because now we have overrode our numpy library with the number 10! We can easily revert


```python
import numpy as np
```

Similarly, don't ever override default python statements. Common mistakes are:


```python
object, type, dir, locals
```




    (object, type, <function dir>, <function locals()>)



Just don't call things these names. You can generally avoid these by giving descriptive names like


```python
my_object = 1
curve_type = False
base_dir = r'\\my\path'
local_string = 'this'
```

## Using library functions

You will generally be solving a problem so for example to find the exponential function in python just google "exponential function in python". If as is common, you know a function exists in a library but are unsure of spelling (or are lazy) you can start typing the method name and hit TAB like `pd.read_` `TAB` will give a series of autocompletion options to select from


```python
pd.read_csv('06_test.csv')
```




<div>
<style scoped>
    .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
        vertical-align: middle;
    }

    .dataframe tbody tr th {
        vertical-align: top;
    }

    .dataframe thead th {
        text-align: right;
    }
</style>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>Programming language</th>
      <th>Designed by</th>
      <th>Appeared</th>
      <th>Extension</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>Python</td>
      <td>Guido van Rossum</td>
      <td>1991</td>
      <td>.py</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>Java</td>
      <td>James Gosling</td>
      <td>1995</td>
      <td>.java</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>C++</td>
      <td>Bjarne Stroustrup</td>
      <td>1983</td>
      <td>.cpp</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>



you can find help for a function by doing `pd.read_csv?` in `ipython`. A more genereric way of finding help for a function is by


```python
help(pd.read_csv)
```

## PATH and `ipython`

*What follows is a little divergence into the internals of your computer so that you understand how `ipython` magically starts ...*

### A brief foray into PATH and system env variables

Python scripts can be installed as executable files (ones you can double click) by `pip` - the tool we encountered before. In order to run these scripts from the commandline we need to make sure that they are on our system PATH.

The system PATH is common in both windows and linux. It contains a list of directories that (may) contain executable files. Any executable files in these directories can directly be ran in the Terminal (or by any other program running). Examples of programs (hopefully!) on your path are:

  - `ls`, the simple program we used earlier for finding files in a directory
  - `python`, the python interpretor

The `PATH` environment variable is simple one of many environment variables that will be o your machine. You can actually create environment variables named whatever you fancy. You may have heard of `PYTHON_PATH`. This is another environment variable only used by `python` and contains a list of all directories that might have `.py` files that can be ran from `python`, hence the nomenclature.

#### Modifying PATH
We can add directories to our path in various ways

##### Temporarily

 - Windows `set PATH = $env:PATH";\\path\to\dir"`
 - Linux `export PATH="$PATH:/path/to/dir"`
 
##### Permanently

 - Windows https://web.archive.org/web/20150729183638/http://www.itechtalk.com/thread3595.html
 - Windows 10 https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44272416/how-to-add-a-folder-to-path-environment-variable-in-windows-10-with-screensho
 - Linux https://stackoverflow.com/a/14638025/4013571
 
### `ipython`

There are two ways to run `ipython` depending on your python setup

 - `python -m ipython`
 - `ipython`
 
The second is my preference because if it doesn't work then some folders are incorrectly set up. The first is the default and should always work. If it doesn't then you should `pip install ipython` again. *Possibly also with the `-IU` mentioned in a previous exercise!*

`ipython` has some great features like 

 - `TAB`-autocompletion (I `TAB` as soon as I write more than 3 letters of a variable name that already exists!)
 - syntax highlighting
 - auto indentation
 - magic commands e.g. `%paste`, `%timeit`, `%hist`

We will use `ipython` for the next few sections before introducing other options

# Exercises

In this example we are going to use a combination of these libraries to webscrape the Bank of England mortgage rates. This is a jump from what we have done before to get you familiar with more complex python scripts

We can find a relevant dataset of interest by exploring http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/boeapps/iadb/AtoZ.asp?Travel=NIx and after a bit of faff I found the help area for submitting requests in the top left of the home page http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/boeapps/iadb/help.asp?Back=Y&Highlight=CSV#CSV

Don't worry about fully understanding the structures below yet. This is just to formulate the example

You can copy the text below and then type `%paste` in `ipython` to run all the code on your clipboard


```python
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# googled "query website with python using parameters" - you will notice they all use 'requests'
import requests

url_endpoint = 'http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/boeapps/iadb/fromshowcolumns.asp?csv.x=yes'

# This format comes from googling 'python query website with requests' and combining it with the parameters required
# by the help link on the BoE site (second link above)
payload = {
    'Datefrom'   : '01/Jan/1970',
    'Dateto'     : '01/Sep/2019',
    'SeriesCodes': 'IUMBV34,IUMBV37,IUMBV42',
    'CSVF'       : 'TN',
    'UsingCodes' : 'Y',
    'VPD'        : 'Y',
    'VFD'        : 'N'
}
response = requests.get(url_endpoint, params=payload)
```


```python
df = pd.read_csv(pd.compat.BytesIO(response.content))  # googled "pandas read_csv from string"
```


```python
df.head()  # peek at result
```


|    | DATE        |   IUMBV34 |   IUMBV37 |   IUMBV42 |
|---:|:------------|----------:|----------:|----------:|
|  0 | 31 Jan 1995 |      8.13 |      8.84 |      9.44 |
|  1 | 28 Feb 1995 |      8.38 |      8.96 |      9.38 |
|  2 | 31 Mar 1995 |      8.08 |      8.64 |      9.33 |
|  3 | 30 Apr 1995 |      8.29 |      8.54 |      9.4  |
|  4 | 31 May 1995 |      8.22 |      8.18 |      9.4  |



Now it's your turn

## Exercise 6.1: Using `pandas` built-in functions

`pandas` will allow you to plot data directly with little effort if you have it in a particular format. The `df.index` is usually the x-coord and the columns are each treated as y-coord for plotting simple scatter / line plots.

You will notice the numeric index on the left of the dataframe contained `df`. We actually want the `'DATE'` to be on the x-axis so you will need to make that the index. Secondly, The `df.index` is in pandas default datetime. This tends to not plot particularly well. We want to convert it to `datetime.datetime` format.

1. Google how to convert a column of a dataframe into datetime format and change the `'DATE'` column to `datetime`.
2. Google how to set an index in a pandas dataframe and set the index so that `df.index` will show the `'DATE'` field.
3. Use the `.plot` method to plot the dataframe.

Note that in `ipython` you will also need to show the plot. Google `"How to show matplotlib plots"` if it doesn't appear.


```python
# Solve me!
```
